Refactor to add advanced job submission (#1570)
rcgsheffield/sheffield_hpc: hpc/scheduler/advanced_job_submission_and_control.rst

        echo "Subtask $subtask_id of task $SGE_TASK_ID"
        ./myprog $subtask_id
    done

**Limiting number of concurrent tasks**

You can use the flag ``-tc 5`` to specify the maximum number of concurrent tasks (five tasks in 
this example). As per the ``-t`` flag, it can either be included on the command line: ::

  #Running 100 jobs with maximum of 5 running concurrently
  qsub -t 1-100 -tc 5 my_array_job.sh

Or in the batch file itself: 

.. code-block:: shell

  #$ -t 1-100
  #$ -tc 5

.. _array_jobs_bessemer:

Task arrays on Bessemer
"""""""""""""""""""""""

.. warning::

  Array jobs on Bessemer can have a maximum of 1000 tasks.

SLURM job arrays are only supported for batch jobs and the array index values are specified using 
the ``--array`` or ``-a`` option of the sbatch command as follows: 

.. code-block:: shell

  # Submit a job array with index values between 0 and 31
  $ sbatch --array=0-31

  # Submit a job array with index values of 1, 3, 5 and 7
  $ sbatch --array=1,3,5,7

  # Submit a job array with index values between 1 and 7
  # with a step size of 2 (i.e. 1, 3, 5 and 7)
  $ sbatch --array=1-7:2

> Job arrays will have two additional environment variable set. ``SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID`` 

Reviewer: >two

But you listed five

Reviewer: Rest of the bessemer job arrays section reads well to me.

Only tertiary info I can think of that would be a convenient addition is a short example for people who want to map the 1D index into 2D(+) indices. I anticipate that's a common requirement for people.

.. _array_jobs_stanage:

Task arrays on Bessemer and Stanage
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. warning::

  Array jobs on Bessemer and Stanage can have a maximum of 1000 tasks.

SLURM job arrays are only supported for batch jobs and the array index values are specified using 
the ``--array`` or ``-a`` option of the sbatch command as follows: 

.. code-block:: console

  # Submit a job array with index values between 0 and 31
  $ sbatch --array=0-31

  # Submit a job array with index values of 1, 3, 5 and 7
  $ sbatch --array=1,3,5,7

  # Submit a job array with index values between 1 and 7
  # with a step size of 2 (i.e. 1, 3, 5 and 7)
  $ sbatch --array=1-7:2

Job arrays will have two additional environment variable set. ``SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID`` 
will be set to the first job ID of the array. ``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`` will be set to the job array 
index value. ``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT`` will be set to the number of tasks in the job array. 
``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX`` will be set to the highest job array index value. 
``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN`` will be set to the lowest job array index value. 

For example a job submission of this sort:

.. code-block:: console

  $ sbatch --array=1-3

>   Submitted batch job 36

Author: ```suggestion
  Submitted batch job 39319
```

Will generate a job array containing three jobs with the environment variables set as follows:

.. code-block:: shell

>   SLURM_JOB_ID=36

Reviewer 2: Maybe have a SLURM_JOB_ID more like those often seen, such as 38240.

>   SLURM_JOB_ID=36

Author: ```suggestion
  SLURM_JOB_ID=39319
```

>   SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=36

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
```

Author: Have you checked what values you get under `SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID` and this change matches the format?

  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=1
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

>   SLURM_JOB_ID=37

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  SLURM_JOB_ID=39320
```

>   SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=36

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
```

Author: As above, have you checked what values you get under SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID and this change matches the format?

If it does would it not be 39320?

>   SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319

Author: ```suggestion
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39320
```

  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=2
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

>   SLURM_JOB_ID=38

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  SLURM_JOB_ID=39321
```

>   SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=36

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
```

>   SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39321

Author: ```suggestion
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
```

  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

All SLURM commands and APIs recognize the ``SLURM_JOB_ID`` value. Most commands also recognize the ``SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID`` 
plus ``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`` values separated by an underscore as identifying an element of a job array. Using the 

> example above, "37" or "36_2" would be equivalent ways to identify the second array element of job 36. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
example above, "39320" or "39319_2" would be equivalent ways to identify the second array element of job 39319. 
```

> example above, "39320" or "39319_2" would be equivalent ways to identify the second array element of job 39319. 

Author: I think this is at least partially unclear as we mention 3 different variables and say you can use it to identify the job, but then don't explicitly state you supply it as the `$JOBID` where `sacct -j $JOBID`

  jid3=$(sbatch  --dependency=afterany:$jid1 --mem=20g job3.sh)
  jid3=$(echo $jid3 | tr -dc '0-9')

  # a single job can depend on multiple jobs
  jid4=$(sbatch  --dependency=afterany:$jid2:$jid3 job4.sh)
  jid4=$(echo $jid4 | tr -dc '0-9')

  # a single job can depend on all jobs by the same user with the same name
  jid5=$(sbatch --dependency=afterany:$jid4 --job-name=dtest job5.sh)
  jid5=$(echo $jid5 | tr -dc '0-9')
  jid6=$(sbatch --dependency=afterany:$jid5 --job-name=dtest job6.sh)
  jid6=$(echo $jid6 | tr -dc '0-9')

  sbatch --dependency=singleton --job-name=dtest job9.sh

-----

Timed start jobs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Jobs can be submitted to the schedulers to run at a specific time. This section explains how 
to achieve this with SGE on ShARC and SLURM on Bessemer and Stanage.

.. _timed_jobs_sharc:

Timed start jobs on ShARC
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Timed start jobs in SGE scheduler are requested with the ``-a`` argument in the following formats:

.. code-block:: shell

  qsub -a 12241200 job1.sh # Dec 24th at 12:00.00
  qsub -a 202312241200 job2.sh # Dec 24th 2023 at 12:00.00
  qsub -a 202312241200.30 job2.sh # Dec 24th 2023 at 12:00.30

> The scheduler will submit these jobs immediately but wait until the elected time has passed to start the jobs running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scheduler will immediately submit these jobs but wait until the elected date/time has passed before starting the execution of the jobs.
```

Author: ```suggestion
The scheduler will immediately submit these jobs but wait until the elected date/time has passed before starting these jobs.
```

The time format must match ``[[CC]]YY]MMDDhhmm[.SS]`` where:

*    **CC**           denotes the century in 2 digits.
*    **YY**           denotes the year in 2 digits.
*    **MM**           denotes the month in 2 digits.
*    **DD**           denotes the day in 2 digits.
*    **hh**           denotes the hour in 2 digits.
*    **mm**           denotes the minute in 2 digits.
*    **ss**           denotes the seconds in 2 digits (default 00).

.. _timed_jobs_bessemer:

.. _timed_jobs_stanage:

Timed start jobs on Bessemer and Stanage
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Timed start jobs using the Slurm scheduler are requested with the ``--begin`` argument in the following formats:

.. code-block:: shell

  sbatch --begin=16:00 job.sh
  sbatch --begin=now+60 job.sh #(seconds by default)
  sbatch --begin=now+1hour job.sh
  sbatch --begin=2023-06-30T12:34:00 job.sh

> The scheduler will submit these jobs immediately but wait until the elected time has passed to start the jobs running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The scheduler will immediately submit these jobs but wait until the elected date/time has passed before starting the execution of the jobs.
```

  SLURM_JOB_ID=39319
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

  SLURM_JOB_ID=39320
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=1
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

  SLURM_JOB_ID=39321
  SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39319
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=2
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_COUNT=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3
  SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

All SLURM commands and APIs recognize the ``SLURM_JOB_ID`` value. Most commands also recognize the ``SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID`` 
plus ``SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID`` values separated by an underscore as identifying an element of a job array. Using the 

> example above, "39320" or "39319_1" would be equivalent ways to identify the second array element of job 39319 as 

Author: This is surprisingly accurate given the SchedMD documentation, so sadly we probably now need to explain:

- The parent job runs the final task (3 in this context) 
- The children jobs start from task minimum array value increasing to the maximum value excluding the final task.

And also submit an issue or bug report to SchedMD asking for clarification / correction on https://slurm.schedmd.com/job_array.html#env_vars

Noting SLURM versions are:

Bessemer - 22.05.6
Stanage - 22.05.4

Good catch!

Debug output from Bessemer:

```
SLURM_JOB_ID=2972603 
SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=2972603 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

SLURM_JOB_ID=2972604 
SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=2972603 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=1 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1

SLURM_JOB_ID=2972605 
SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=2972603 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=2 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1
```

Debug output from Stanage:

```
SLURM_JOB_ID=39874 
SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39874 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1
 
SLURM_JOB_ID=39875 
SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39874 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=1 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1
 
SLURM_JOB_ID=39876 
SLURM_ARRAY_JOB_ID=39874 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID=2 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MAX=3 
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_MIN=1
```

Reviewer 2: Thanks @jkwmoore https://bugs.schedmd.com/show_bug.cgi?id=16962#c0
